%% -*- mode: LaTeX; compile-command: "mk" -*-

\newpage
\chapter*{Acknowledgments}

During the first few years of my PhD, I bounced around between
research topics, trying to find one that I could get truly excited
about that was . I even wondered at times whether
I made a mistake in choosing an advisor.  I did not. \todo{finish}

Jacques Carette has been an unofficial second advisor to me,
generously taking time away from his many official duties to
collaborate, give feedback and advice, and even twice to host me for a
week of focused, face-to-face collaboration.  This dissertation
literally would not exist were it not for his academic and personal
generosity.

My wife Joyia and son Noah \todo{finish}  parents \todo{finish}

The other members of the Penn programming languages group---especially
(though by no means limited to) Chris Casinghino, Richard Eisenberg,
Nate Foster, Michael Greenberg, Peter-Michael Osera, Benjamin Pierce,
Vilhelm Sj\"oberg, Daniel Wagner, and Steve Zdancewic---deserve a
great deal of thanks for all their support over the years, through
moral support and encouragement, critical feedback on papers and
talks, enlightening discussions, and simply friendship.  PL Club has
been a wonderfully collegial community in which to learn and work.

While developing the ideas in this dissertation I have benefited over
the years, both directly and indirectly, from conversations with many
people in the Haskell community and the wider FP and PL communities,
particularly Faris Abou-Saleh, Reid Barton, Gershom Bazerman, Conal
Elliott, Jeremy Gibbons, Andy Gill, Jason Gross, Ralf Hinze, Neel
Krishnaswami, Dan Licata, Peter Lumsdaine, Simon Peyton Jones, Ross
Street, Andrea Vezzosi, and Nick Wu, along with many others.  I am
also grateful to Heinrich Apfelmus, Toby Bartels, Gabor Greif, Jay
McCarthy, Colin McQuillan, David Roberts, Jon Sterling, and Ryan
Yates, all of whom read early drafts of this dissertation and sent me
typo reports as well as more substantial suggestions, greatly
improving the final product.  Thanks also to the anonymous MSFP and
MFPS reviewers, whose feedback on submissions based on this material
led to many substantial improvements to the technical content.

The \texttt{diagrams} community---particularly Daniel Bergey, Chris
Chalmers, Jeff Rosenbluth, Michael Sloan, Luite Stegeman, and Ryan
Yates---has been a great source of joy to me during the long process
of completing my PhD.  Not only have they provided encouragement,
camaraderie, and welcome distraction, but this dissertation itself is
richer for their contributions to \texttt{diagrams}---many of the
diagrams throughout this document make nontrivial use of features
contributed by other members of the community.  It has also been a
particular joy to see the project continue humming along even during
my virtual absence while writing.

It is staggering to consider the wealth of relationship accumulated
during six years at City Church Philadelphia. \todo{nurturing,
  supportive}.  Tuck and Stacy Bartholomew, Darren Bell, Dave and
Katie Brindley, Sara Cayless, Mike and Sonja Chen, Tim and Ruth
Creber, Chris and Bonnie Currie, Ben Doane and Melissa McCarten, John
Dyck, Will and Margaret Kendall, Dick Landis, Colin and Lauren
Marlowe, Drew and Susie Matter, Nick McAvoy, Chris and Sarah Miciek,
Jeremy Millington, Cat Ricketts, Ben Smith, Josh and Kory Stamper, Ben
Sykora and Beth Dyson, Matt Thanabalan and Carrie Lutjens, Gene and
Laura Twilley, and Jackson Warren, all of whom, at various times and
in various ways, have provided encouragement and support as I made my
way through graduate school. It is certain that I have forgotten
others who should also be on this list, and in any case it is not even
clear where the list should stop; I am full of gratitude to all those
we \todo{finish}.

I thank the Mustard Seed Foundation for their affirmation in selecting
me as a Harvey Fellow, and for their support, both financially and in
helping me think through the integration of my faith and work.

A heartfelt thank you to the Williams College computer science
department for the genuine care and support I have received as a
visiting faculty member, and especially to Bill Lenhart for his
generous gift of time in taking on most of the grungy legwork for CS
134.  Beginning a new job, teaching two classes, and simultaneously
completing a dissertation would be impossible even to contemplate were
it not undertaken in such a supportive environment.

In Philadelphia, the Green Line Cafe, Lovers \& Madmen, the Penn
Graduate Student Center, and Van Pelt library---and in Williamstown,
Tunnel City Coffee and the Schow science library---have all provided
wonderfully conducive environments for focused writing sessions.

Last but certainly not least, a big thank you is due to Beeminder
(\url{http://beeminder.com}), particularly to the cofounders, Bethany
Soule and Danny Reeves.  The chance that I would have successfully
finished this dissertation without Beeminder is vanishingly small, for
the simple reason that a dissertation cannot be put off until a week
before it is due.  \$145 for the motivation to write a dissertation is
quite a steal; I owe the whole Beeminder team a round of beers!

\todo{Include beeminder graphs!}

\begin{figure}[b]
\tiny\flushleft

My work has been supported by the National Science Foundation under
grants 1218002 \todo{?} and \todo{fill in}.
\end{figure}
